
<!-- saved from url=(0093)http://html2text.theinfo.org/?url=http%3A//www.accessmylibrary.com/article/print/1G1-19318843 -->
<html><head><meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"></head><body><pre style="word-wrap: break-word; white-space: pre-wrap;">![](http://images.accessmylibrary.com/Content/Images/Logos/logo_aml_printableh
eader.jpg) ![Library Technology
Reports](http://images.accessmylibrary.com/image/MAGS/publogo/416585/library-
technology-reports)

# Building a digital library: concepts and issues.(part 1: introduction,
definitions, strategic issues, general issues)

Library Technology Reports | September 01, 1996 | Barber, David

INTRODUCTION

WHAT IS A DIGITAL LIBRARY?

This report will try to explain the issues that need to be considered when
building a digital library. It is intended to fill in the information gaps
between merely knowing digital library concepts and having a sense of the kind
of digital libraries already being built by large library organizations and
understanding what is involved in their creation and functioning. Digital
libraries are not exclusively the concern of large institutions or large
research universities. Every library in any kind of organization that begins
to move beyond bibliographic citations to providing online content for its
patrons has begun to build a digital library. Thus, digital libraries can be
built by public libraries, school libraries, and university and college
libraries.

For a long time electronic collection building efforts have centered around
information which is a step to other information. Whatever the value of this
information, its online presence can not be said to constitute a digital
library. These resources are simply tools to find content. It is this final
content and its availability in digital form that distinguishes a digital
library.

Actual digital library holdings, not just digital pointers to print resources,
are what it takes to involve libraries in digital library building. The
intended holdings need not be vast or managed by sophisticated software. A
library that maintains a Gopher or WWW page with pointers to Internet
resources (whether those be images, text, or other forms of information) has
begun to build a digital library: it is evaluating and selecting among
available digital resources and their delivery systems.

The resources in a digital library may be local or maintained remotely by a
vendor like OCLC. They may be widely held like the popular periodical
databases created by EBSCO, UMI, and IAC, or newer types of complex
information resources like the geographic data files maintained by only a few
institutions.

WHAT KIND OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES WILL BE DISCUSSED?

This report is about Internet digital libraries, not resources mounted and
made available on a local LAN. It discusses digital libraries that use the
Internet and standard Internet protocols, TCP/IP and HTTP, for communication.
The report is primarily about digital library services provided over the WWW
and accessed through a WWW browser like Netscape Navigator or Microsoft
Internet Explorer. But the next generation of web software systems, which will
move beyond browser and HTTP protocol use, are also described.

Some kinds of systems will not be included in this report, such as CD-ROM
LANs, Gopher servers, VT100 interfaces, and proprietary Windows clients. All
these fall outside of the scope of this discussion.

DIGITAL LIBRARY BUILDING IS AN ART

Since digital library building is new to most librarians, it is a skill that
must be learned in order to make intelligent decisions-even if the only
decision made is not to begin. This report will attempt to teach some of the
arts of digital library building by describing the human and technological
ingredients that are needed, including staff, networks, and communications
mechanisms, as well as the particular kind of technologies used to manage
digital content, including images, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) data,
text, and numeric data.

In a way, this report is akin to the genre of library science books that for
years have attempted to prepare librarians who will have some responsibility
for the building of physical libraries. Those books will not make their
readers capable of designing a plumbing system for a library, but they may
alert the reader to some important concerns and the goals for such a system.
They prepare librarians to undertake building projects by giving them the
language to be able to deal with specialists and a sense of the questions to
ask.

Digital library building is an art. While individual technologies described in
this report are based on science, their successful application is an art form.
There are too many unknowns for scientific certainty to be possible. Equipment
and applications are selected with an imperfect appreciation of the exact
usage they will receive, since it is impossible to determine how many people
will really use a system until it has been created. New technologies and
services opportunities also appear all the time. These make it impossible to
exactly determine what kinds of services might be offered in the future, and
what hardware and software they will require.

The vocabulary of the art form described in this report contains many terms
and informal rules of thumb used by computer professionals. It also
necessarily contains editorial comments of the author. Where quantitative
guidance can be offered, it is provided. The reader is encouraged to see these
as starting points for investigation and to measure their validity by
discussions with local experts and vendors.

Much of the art of digital library building is careful strategy. System
developers need to make the best bets they can on present and future
technologies in order to avoid limiting future flexibility and most of all to
avoid large investment in ephemeral technologies. The issues raised in this
report will provide a sense of the issues that builders need to be wary of
when they are constructing their own digital library. Specific issues, like
terminal hardware, and general issues, like the broad forces pushing
technology, are described to help with this strategy building process. The
focus on strategy is important because it directs attention from specific
technologies that are here today and gone tomorrow to the broader issues that
need to be addressed.

This report is not written only for those who wish to build their own digital
libraries from the ground up but also for libraries who are going to buy
access to information systems maintained by others. After reading this report,
you may be ready to decide how much you want to do locally and what kind of
products to purchase from others. One of the best strategies to employ in
building digital libraries is to let someone else do the work. Then, the only
decision to be made is which vendor is best able to do the job.

WHAT ABOUT THE OPAC?

There is no section on the library catalog in this report, but this does not
mean it is absent from the discussion. The traditional library catalog can
play many potential different roles in a digital library, such as a repository
of information about the library's digital holdings and their location on the
Internet. Where these opportunities arise, the library catalog is suggested as
a possible tool to be used to help build some of the services in the digital
library.

The role and importance of the online public access catalog (OPAC) are also
assured in a digital library because the proportion of available digital
content is tiny compared to the amount of printed materials available. Nor is
conversion from print to digital form likely to substantially reduce the size
of the collection of print materials. Many resources are so large that
complete digital conversion is not a possibility. At the Cleveland Public
Library, there is a collection of over a million photographs. Assuming that
the necessary financial resources could be found, and assuming that digital
conversion of each photograph might take five minutes of handling and
scanning, this task would take one person over two thousand 40-hour work
weeks, or 40 years. Production of the digital images at a faster rate would
require either devotion of more library staff to the project or sending the
photographs to a commercial firm. Both alternatives are unlikely because of
the kind of organizational resource constraints facing most libraries. The
latter alternative is also improbable given the delicate state of many
photographs and the difficulty in ensuring their careful treatment. With the
ability to convert materials to digital form limited by these kinds of
conditions, the OPAC will continue to play the valuable role of providing
bibliographic information about materials not yet digitized.

The development of digital libraries is also not likely to make the book
obsolete in the near future, despite occasional predictions to this effect.
Given the importance and availability of resources only in print, the
maintenance of the catalog is essential.

As is usually the case with technology, potential new digital library services
add to the list of traditional functions that can be performed by a library.
It is up to the administrators of individual libraries to decide how important
the digital library services will be and whether a reallocation of resources
should be made to permit more investment in those services. This report should
give a sense of what is possible with digital library services and what
components are necessary. It is then up to the reader to decide how important
those services are relative to traditional functions.

1. WHAT IS A DIGITAL LIBRARY?

A digital library is defined in terms of the kind of services provided and in
terms of the resources required. Each of these is described below to give the
reader an understanding of the components that make up a digital library. This
will help provide an overview of the topics dealt with at more length in this
report and enable the reader to appreciate the relationship of each digital
library component to those of the rest of the library.

The services performed constitute both direct patron services and
infrastructure services. The former includes management of and access to
digital library content, auxiliary services like electronic communication with
the library, SDI (selective dissemination of information), and delivery
services. The latter refers to services which are needed to make the direct
patron services possible. They include security, naming services, charging,
and maintenance of patron information.

The problem of integration envelopes these services and functions in the
digital library. Individual services must be linked to make the digital
library work. Many security systems will require access to patron records in
order to determine whether a patron is allowed access to digital library
systems. A citation database system could use information about a library's
electronic journal holdings stored in an OPAC to create URL links that will
take the patron directly from the citation to the remote server where the
electronic version of the article is available. Integration makes the digital
library more than the sum of its parts.

A digital library is also defined by the resources that go into its
construction. Looking at services offered focuses attention on the software
used to build a digital library. Hardware is also an essential ingredient.
Servers, terminals, and networks are all required. Finally, staff are needed
to bring the resources together and make the digital library happen.

1.1 FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS

Figure 1-1 is a graphic portrayal of the service components of a digital
library. (It ignores the hardware involved.) In the background is a mesh
representing the interconnections that have to be made between individual
services.

[Figure 1-1 ILLUSTRATION OMITTED]

1.1.1 Content Management Systems

The most prominent objects in Figure 1-1 are the content management systems
since these are the heart of the digital library. Without digital content,
there would be no digital library. "Content management system" is a term used
to refer to the aggregate set of functions performed to make a particular type
of content, for example, electronic text, available to end users. There can be
many actual examples of content management systems in a digital library, but
this report focuses on four primary types: images, text, geographic data, and
numeric data. A content management system has two key parts: an information
access system and an information management system.

1.1.1.1 Information Access System

The information access system is more than just the user interface.
Information access refers broadly to the types of functions that may be
possible with the use of a system. It includes the functions usually provided
for particular material types, for example, in the case of geographic data
that would be the function of drawing maps.

Information access includes finding and viewing the content. It may also go
further, potentially much further, to include information processing
functions. Some types of information may need to have processing performed on
them after they are retrieved. For example, large Tagged Image File Format
(TIFF) image files may need to be converted to Graphics Interchange Format
(GIF) files that are more easily viewed with a WWW browser. Translation of
formats is a common processing step. Another common form of processing is
analysis. In the case of numeric information, the option of performing various
statistical operations such as the calculation of means might be offered.

1.1.1.2 Information Management System

Information management involves making information access possible. Particular
information access functions will not be possible without the right kind of
underlying storage and management mechanism whether it be a database system,
search engine, or some other tool. There are four principal content types in
current digital libraries: (1) images; (2) numeric data, e.g., the 1990 United
States Census; (3) text, including electronic journals; and (4) geographic
data. Each requires its own type of content management system. In some cases
where a category can be broken down into subformats, e.g., electronic
journals, those subformats may require specialized content management systems.

Content management is not possible without the acquisition of content. This
can be accomplished by purchase from available vendors, through internal
library development such as scanning, or purchase from remote vendor sites.
The nature of the market for information will affect the kind of content
likely to be bought and influence the extent to which local management will be
necessary. The local content management in turn will affect the software that
can be used and problems of information loading and translation.

1.1.2 Infrastructure Services

Limited resources and licenses mandate that these services be offered only to
certain individuals. This produces a need for several key interrelated
services. Security services are needed to ensure that content is provided only
to those who are allowed access. Security in turn may be dependent on patron
information which can be used to identify and authorize users. Because another
…

[![](http://images.accessmylibrary.com/content/images/ico/ico_printable.gif)](
/GetDayPass)

Read the full-text version of this article when you [log into
AccessMyLibrary](/GetDayPass)

COPYRIGHT 2003 American Library Association.

(C)2012 Gale, a part of Cengage Learning. All rights reserved.
[www.accessmylibrary.com](/)

The AccessMyLibrary advertising network includes: ![womensforum.com
GlamFamily](/content/images/logos/womensforum.gif)

</pre></body></html>